docs: Podman - Document how to setup DMS with Quadlet (#4183)
docker-mailserver/docker-mailserver: docs/content/config/advanced/podman.md

!!! tip "Rootless compatibility"

    Quadlets can [support rootless with a few differences][podman::rootless-differences]:

    - `Network=pasta` configures [`pasta`][network-driver::pasta] as a rootless compatible network driver (_a popular alternative to `slirp4netns`. `pasta` is the default for rootless since Podman v5_).
    - `Restart=always` will auto-start your Quadlet at login, rootless support requires to enable [lingering][systemd-docs::loginctl::linger] for your user:

        ```bash
        loginctl enable-linger user
        ```
    - [Config locations between rootful vs rootless][podman-docs::quadlet::config-search-path].

[podman::rootless-differences]: https://matduggan.com/replace-compose-with-quadlet/#rootless
[network-driver::pasta]: https://passt.top/passt/about/#pasta
[systemd-docs::loginctl::linger]: https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/latest/loginctl.html#enable-linger%20USER%E2%80%A6
[podman-docs::quadlet::config-search-path]: https://docs.podman.io/en/latest/markdown/podman-systemd.unit.5.html#podman-rootful-unit-search-path

#### Example Quadlet file

We have to use the .container extension for the quadlet generator to pick up the service.

> Because docker-mailserver uses multiple users inside the container, we will either have to use our own user as root, resulting in our e-mails being owned by a subuid. Alternatively, using UIDMap we can map our rootless user to UID 5000 in the container who owns our e-mails. Using UIDMap also maps root user 0 inside the container to an available sub-uid of our rootless user. Otherwise the container will not have permission to configure itself.

Author: The choice is arbitrary in the end. I wanted the mail-storage mount to be owned by the rootless user starting the container, and have root inside the container not directly mapped to the user starting the container.

I spent a long time too messing around with uid-maps, and it solves a lot of problems that rootless podman-containers seem to have for beginners. I seem to have learned even more from your findings, thanks!

> Because docker-mailserver uses multiple users inside the container, we will either have to use our own user as root, resulting in our e-mails being owned by a subuid. Alternatively, using UIDMap we can map our rootless user to UID 5000 in the container who owns our e-mails. Using UIDMap also maps root user 0 inside the container to an available sub-uid of our rootless user. Otherwise the container will not have permission to configure itself.

Reviewer: > The choice is arbitrary in the end.

Yes, agreed. Just curious why you might have preferred this choice.

> I wanted the mail-storage mount to be owned by the rootless user starting the container, and have root inside the container not directly mapped to the user starting the container.

Ok, but no practical reason for that right? Since you'd rarely need access to this content outside of the container (_beyond persistent storage_) and you're more likely as a user to want to have ownership of `root` files for the Config Volume yeah? (_similar benefit for logs too_).

`idmap` option for `Volume` settings would be useful for such, but with rootless it's just not available unfortunately.

If you did have a legitimate use-case for preferring `5000` mapped to your host user that would be good to know. I'll otherwise switch to `UIDMap=+0:@%U` for the official advice, with some context added to the docs that I've touched on above and in my other review feedback, with `UIDMap=+5000:@%U` as an alternative example.

> I seem to have learned even more from your findings, thanks!

You're welcome!

---

I'll try allocate some time tomorrow for the final revision and we can then get this merged! 😁

The example uses `Network=pasta` to use the pasta network driver, which will replace `slirp4netns`.

`dockermailservice.container`

```
[Service]
Restart=always

[Install]
WantedBy=default.target

[Unit]
Wants=network-online.target 
After=network-online.target

[Container]
ContainerName=dms

> Image=docker.io/mailserver/docker-mailserver:latest 

Author: Seems to be some legacy from the config I had before.

# DMS uses uid 5000 for mailstate, but creates other folders for different users, which will be mapped to different sub-uids
UIDMap=5000:0:1
UIDMap=0:1:5000

> UIDMap=5001:5001:60536

Reviewer: Awaiting your feedback before I make a suggestion here. I'd still like to document `UIDMap` since it did take a while to grok and make sense of and I've seen others confused by it when I was looking into how the mapping works (_volumes also map in reverse which was a bit unexpected, so at one point my host user resolved to intermediate ID `0` which then mapped to container ID 1 (`daemon`), or in the case of config above 5000 (`docker`)_).

Also, I'm not sure of the exact cause but I noticed that `UIDMap=+0:0` and `UIDMap=+0:1` were quick to start, but when the intermediate ID was higher than that there was a 25-30 second delay to container startup, presumably some sort of `chown` (this is on SSD storage too)? Your suggested config here with mapping `5000` to `0` also triggers that IIRC (_not this specific mapping, but something about the other lines that come after_).

Seems to be related to range mapping, as you can do a single mapping for `0` intermediate ID just fine, except for a `supervisord` failure with it's socket (_but this seems to be resolved when `65534` for `nobody` / `nogroup` ID is mapped too_).

Reviewer: **TL;DR:** You can ignore the bulk of this, it's mostly for me or anyone else that needs the additional context if the topic comes up again in future.

`UIDMap=+0:@%U` seems like the better choice to default to for rootless podman needs.

---

## `UIDMap` notes | Mapping behaviour + chown delay and storage accumulation

It only seems like the delay was a one off hit per mapping. Each one was copying the image (700MB+), presumably entirely remapped to `~/.local/share/containers/storage/overlay`.

Here is the initial pull without any `UIDMap` involved:

![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a83d0c61-b22c-48d6-a7b1-47dd21c13acc)

```
UIDMap=5000:0:1
UIDMap=0:1:5000
UIDMap=5001:5001:60536
```

Is equivalent to `UIDMap=+5000:@%U` in mapping and thus once one is used, switching config to the other won't have startup delay as the overlay copy is already handled.

```console
$ podman exec -it dms cat /proc/self/uid_map

         0          1       5000
      5000          0          1
      5001       5001      60536
```

---

### ClamAV (UID 200) example | When mapping triggers a larger chown copy

The overhead from that mapping results in a overlay squashed layer weighing `762.56 MiB` as opposed to `538.51 MiB` for `UIDMap=+0:@%U`, with the main difference in weight being the ClamAV layer (223 MiB) not being included in the squashed overlay diff.

```console
$ podman exec -it dms bash -c 'ls -l /var/lib/ | grep clamav && ls -l /var/lib/clamav'

drwxr-xr-x. 1 clamav       clamav       4096 Jun  3 01:07 clamav
total 228992
-rw-r--r--. 1 clamav clamav    289733 Jun  3 01:07 bytecode.cvd
-rw-r--r--. 1 clamav clamav  63700823 Jun  3 01:06 daily.cvd
-rw-r--r--. 1 clamav clamav 170479789 Jun  3 01:06 main.cvd
```

`clamav` user and group have UID/GID of `200` within the container.

```console
# An extra `chown` copy happens with `UIDMap=+0:201`:
$ podman exec -it dms cat /proc/self/uid_map

         0        201          1
         1          0          1
         2          1        200
       202        202      65335

# As opposed to `UIDMap=+0:200`:
$ podman exec -it dms cat /proc/self/uid_map
         0        200          1
         1          0          1
         2          1        199
       201        201      65336

# Or  `UIDMap=+0:199`:
$ podman exec -it dms cat /proc/self/uid_map
         0        199          1
         1          0          1
         2          1        198
       200        200      65337
```

- The separate `1 0 1` mapping I think is added when you map with `+` prefix and seems a bit redundant in this case. I think it's implemented to handle the container root ID separately to avoid this error `container ID 0 cannot be mapped to a host ID`, while also handling any before/after mapping.
- `UIDMap=+0:201` => The `2 1 200` line covers UID 200 (clamav) thus it is mapped with an offset requiring a `chown`.
- `UIDMap=+0:200` => AFAIK there is no mapping for container UID 200 to any host ID, so it is unaffected.
-  `UIDMap=+0:199` => There is a mapping now, but it's direct `200` => `200`, it will use the existing overlay layer (_created during original pull_) which has that ownership with `chown` already applied for that offset:

   ```console
   $ ls -l /home/linuxuser/.local/share/containers/storage/overlay/ccab93e94733e94b645eb852f9bfa7471955cb1d184ef6224fbe51980d30e767/diff/var/lib/clamav
   total 228980
   -rw-r--r--. 1 524487 524487    289733 Jun  3 01:07 bytecode.cvd
   -rw-r--r--. 1 524487 524487  63700823 Jun  3 01:06 daily.cvd
   -rw-r--r--. 1 524487 524487 170479789 Jun  3 01:06 main.cvd
   ```
   
   `524487` is the base `524288` + (200 -1). UID 0 technically maps to 1000 (`linuxuser` in this case), then from UID offset of 1 in `/etc/subuid` on the host we increment from `524288`, hence container UID `200` maps to host UID `524487`:
   
   ```console
   $ cat /etc/subuid
   
   linuxuser:524288:65536
   ```

---

### Default mapping vs `UIDMap=+0:@1000`

For reference this is the default without any `UIDMap` setting:

```console
$ podman exec -it dms cat /proc/self/uid_map

         0       1000          1
         1     524288      65536
```

That is valid for rootful where the 2nd column would align with the host UID, but in rootless the 2nd column is a 
"intermediate ID" that is mapped as an offset for the user host ID entry in `/etc/subuid`.

Hence the `@1000` syntax for `UIDMap` which would be the equivalent for rootless (mapping to the `0` offset), so `UIDMap=+0:@1000` would get us the desired rootless mapping:

```console
$ podman exec -it dms cat /proc/self/uid_map

         0          0          1
         1          1      65536
```

### `chown` storage copies cleanup

The extra copies of the image at `~/.local/share/containers/storage/overlay` are tied to the image, so when all references are removed via `podman image rm` or `podman image prune -a` / `podman system prune -a` (_assuming no container is running with the image_).

I'm not aware of how you can clear that more selectively than that (_`podman run --rm --uidmap ...` is the same with accumulation_).

Network=pasta
PublishPort=25:25
PublishPort=143:143
PublishPort=587:587
PublishPort=993:993

# Volumes
Volume=/tank/dms/certs:/tmp/ssl
Volume=/tank/dms/maildata:/var/mail
Volume=/tank/dms/mailstate:/var/mail-state
Volume=/tank/dms/maillogs:/var/log/mail
Volume=/tank/dms/config:/tmp/docker-mailserver/

# If you want to use podmans auto-update service:
AutoUpdate=registry 

# Environment variables
# General Settings

Environment=HOSTNAME=example
Environment=DOMAINNAME=example.com

> Environment=CONTAINER_NAME=dockermailserver

Author: I seem to remember this was an older way of doing it, got left over from before.

    [Quadlets define your podman configuration][podman-docs::quadlet::example-configs] (_pods, volumes, networks, images, etc_) which are [adapted into the equivalent systemd service config files][podman::quadlet::generated-output-example] at [boot or when reloading the systemd daemon][podman-docs::config::quadlet-generation] (`systemctl daemon-reload` / `systemctl --user daemon-reload`).

!!! tip "Rootless compatibility"

    Quadlets can [support rootless with a few differences][podman::rootless-differences]:

    - `Network=pasta` configures [`pasta`][network-driver::pasta] as a rootless compatible network driver (_a popular alternative to `slirp4netns`. `pasta` is the default for rootless since Podman v5_).
    - `Restart=always` will auto-start your Quadlet at login. Rootless support requires to enable [lingering][systemd-docs::loginctl::linger] for your user:

        ```bash
        loginctl enable-linger user
        ```
    - [Config locations between rootful vs rootless][podman-docs::quadlet::config-search-path].

#### Example Quadlet file

> 1. Create your DMS Quadlet at `~/.config/containers/systemd/dms.container` with the example content shown below.
> 2. Run [`systemctl --user daemon-reload`][systemd-docs::systemctl::daemon-reload], which will trigger the Quadlet service generator (_required whenever you adjust config in `dms.container`_).
> 3. You should now be able to start the service with `systemctl --user start dms`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
???+ example

    1. Create your DMS Quadlet at `~/.config/containers/systemd/dms.container` with the example content shown below.
        - Adjust settings like `HostName` as needed. You may prefer a different convention for your `Volume` host paths.
        - Some syntax like systemd specifiers and Podman's `UIDMap` value are explained in detail after this example.
    2. Run [`systemctl --user daemon-reload`][systemd-docs::systemctl::daemon-reload], which will trigger the Quadlet service generator. This command is required whenever you adjust config in `dms.container`.
    3. You should now be able to start the service with `systemctl --user start dms`.
```

#   https://docs.podman.io/en/latest/markdown/podman-run.1.html#volume-v-source-volume-host-dir-container-dir-options
Volume=%h/volumes/certbot/certs:/etc/letsencrypt:ro

# Podman can create a timer (defaults to daily at midnight) to check the `registry` or `local` storage for detecting if the
# image tag points to a new digest, if so it updates the image and restarts the service (similar to `containrrr/watchtower`):
# https://docs.podman.io/en/latest/markdown/podman-auto-update.1.html
AutoUpdate=registry

# Podman Quadlet has a better alternative instead of a volume directly bind mounting `/etc/localtime` to match the host TZ:
# https://docs.podman.io/en/latest/markdown/podman-run.1.html#tz-timezone
# NOTE: Should the host modify the system TZ, neither approach will sync the change to the `/etc/localtime` inside the running container.
Timezone=local

Environment=SSL_TYPE=letsencrypt
# NOTE: You may need to adjust the default `NETWORK_INTERFACE`:
# https://docker-mailserver.github.io/docker-mailserver/latest/config/environment/#network_interface
#Environment=NETWORK_INTERFACE=enp1s0
#Environment=NETWORK_INTERFACE=tap0
```

> !!! info "Systemd specifiers"
> 
>     Systemd has a [variety of specifiers][systemd-docs::config-specifiers] (_prefixed with `%`_) that help manage configs.
>     
>     Here are the ones used from the above example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
??? info "Systemd specifiers"

    Systemd has a [variety of specifiers][systemd-docs::config-specifiers] (_prefixed with `%`_) that help manage configs.
    
    Here are the ones used in the Quadlet config example:
```

>     - ***`%h`:** Location of the users home directory. Use this instead of `~` (_which would only work in a shell, not this config_).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - **`%h`:** Location of the users home directory. Use this instead of `~` (_which would only work in a shell, not this config_).
```

Start container:

`systemctl --user start dockermailserver`

Stop container:

`systemctl --user stop dockermailserver`

Using root with machinectl (used for some Ansible versions):

`machinectl -q shell yourrootlessuser@ /bin/systemctl --user start dockermailserver`

#### Mapping ownership between container and host users

Podman supports a few different approaches for this functionality. For rootless Quadlets you will likely want to use `UIDMap` (_`GIDMap` will use this same mapping by default_).

- `UIDMap` + `GIDMap` works by mapping user and group IDs from a container, to IDs associated for a user on the host [configured in `/etc/subuid` + `/etc/subgid`][podman-docs::rootless-mode] (_this isn't necessary for rootful Podman_).
- Each mapping must be unique, thus only a single container UID can map to your rootless UID on the host. Every other container UID mapped must be within the configured range from `/etc/subuid`.
- Rootless containers have one additional level of mapping involved. This is an offset from their `/etc/subuid` entry starting from `0`, but can be inferred when the intended UID on the host is prefixed with `@`

> !!! example 
> 
>     The most common case is to map the containers root user (UID `0`) to your host user ID.
> 
>     For a rootless user with the UID `1000` on the host, any of the following `UIDMap` values are equivalent:
> 
>     - **`UIDMap=+0:0`:** The 1st `0` is the container root ID and the 2nd `0` refers to host mapping ID. For rootless the mapping ID is an indirect offset to their user entry in `/etc/subuid` where `0` maps to their host user ID.
>     - **`UIDMap=+0:@1000`:** A rootless Quadlet can also use `@` as a prefix which tells Podman to infer the mapping ID from `/etc/subuid`.
>     - **`UIDMap=+0:@%U`:** Instead of providing the explicit rootless UID, a better approach is to leverage `%U` (_a [systemd specifier][systemd-docs::config-specifiers]_) which will resolve to the UID of your rootless user that starts the Quadlet service.
> 
> ??? tip "What is the `+` syntax?"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
??? tip "Why should I prefer `UIDMap=+0:@%U`? How does the `@` syntax work?"

    The most common case is to map the containers root user (UID `0`) to your host user ID.

    For a rootless user with the UID `1000` on the host, any of the following `UIDMap` values are equivalent:

    - **`UIDMap=+0:0`:** The 1st `0` is the container root ID and the 2nd `0` refers to host mapping ID. For rootless the mapping ID is an indirect offset to their user entry in `/etc/subuid` where `0` maps to their host user ID, while `1` or higher maps to the users subuid range.
    - **`UIDMap=+0:@1000`:** A rootless Quadlet can also use `@` as a prefix which Podman will then instead lookup as the host ID in `/etc/subuid` to get the offset value. If the host user ID was `1000`, then `@1000` would resolve that to `0`.
    - **`UIDMap=+0:@%U`:** Instead of providing the explicit rootless UID, a better approach is to leverage `%U` (_a [systemd specifier][systemd-docs::config-specifiers]_) which will resolve to the UID of your rootless user that starts the Quadlet service.

??? tip "What is the `+` syntax used with `UIDMap`?"
```

    Prefixing the container ID with `+` is a a podman feature similar to `@`, which ensures `/etc/subuid` is mapped fully.

    For example `UIDMap=+5000:@%U` is the short-hand equivalent to:

    ```ini
    UIDMap=5000:0:1
    UIDMap=0:1:5000
    UIDMap=5001:5001:60536
    ```

    The third value is the amount of IDs to map from the `container:host` pair as an offset/range. It defaults to `1`.

    In addition to our explicit `5000:0` mapping, the `+` ensures:

    - That we have a mapping of all container ID prior to `5000` to IDs from our rootless user entry in `/etc/subuid` on the host.
    - It also adds a mapping after this value for the remainder of the range configured in `/etc/subuid` which covers the `nobody` user in the container.

    Within the container you can view these mappings via `cat /proc/self/uid_map`.

> ??? warning "Rootless image disk usage"
> 
>     **NOTE:** This should not usually be a concern. It has been documented to explain the impact of creating new user namespaces (_such as by tweaking settings like `UIDMap` multiple times_).
> 
>     ---
> 
>     Rootless containers [perform a copy of the image with `chown`][caveat::podman::rootless::image-chown] during the first pull/run of the image.
> 
>     - The larger the image to copy, the longer the initial delay on first use.
>     - This process will be repeated if the `UIDMap` / `GIDMap` settings are changed to a value that has not been used previously (_accumulating more disk usage with additional image copies_).
>     - Only when the original image is removed will any of these associated `chown` image copies be purged from storage.
> 
>     When you specify a `UIDMap` like shown in the prior tip for the `+` syntax with `UIDMap=+0:5000`, if the `/proc/self/uid_map` shows a row with the first two columns as equivalent then no excess `chown` should be applied.
> 
>     - `UIDMap=+0:@%U` is equivalent from ID 2 onwards.
>     - `UIDMap=+5000:@%U` is equivalent from ID 5001 onwards. This is relevant with DMS as the container UID 200 is assigned to ClamAV, the offset introduced will now incur a `chown` copy of 230MB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
??? warning "Impact on disk usage of images with Rootless"

    **NOTE:** This should not usually be a concern, but has been documented here to explain the impact of creating new user namespaces (_such as by running a container with settings like `UIDMap` that differ between runs_).

    ---

    Rootless containers [perform a copy of the image with `chown`][caveat::podman::rootless::image-chown] during the first pull/run of the image.

    - The larger the image to copy, the longer the initial delay on first use.
    - This process will be repeated if the `UIDMap` / `GIDMap` settings are changed to a value that has not been used previously (_accumulating more disk usage with additional image layer copies_).
    - Only when the original image is removed will any of these associated `chown` image copies be purged from storage.

    When you specify a `UIDMap` like demonstrated in the earlier tip for the `+` syntax with `UIDMap=+0:5000`, if the `/proc/self/uid_map` shows a row with the first two columns as equivalent then no excess `chown` should be applied.

    - `UIDMap=+0:@%U` is equivalent from ID 2 onwards.
    - `UIDMap=+5000:@%U` is equivalent from ID 5001 onwards. This is relevant with DMS as the container UID 200 is assigned to ClamAV, the offset introduced will now incur a `chown` copy of 230MB.
```

    - `Restart=always` will auto-start your Quadlet at login. Rootless support requires to enable [lingering][systemd-docs::loginctl::linger] for your user:

        ```bash
        loginctl enable-linger user
        ```
    - [Config locations between rootful vs rootless][podman-docs::quadlet::config-search-path].

#### Example Quadlet file

???+ example

    1. Create your DMS Quadlet at `~/.config/containers/systemd/dms.container` with the example content shown below.
        - Adjust settings like `HostName` as needed. You may prefer a different convention for your `Volume` host paths.
        - Some syntax like systemd specifiers and Podman's `UIDMap` value are explained in detail after this example.
    2. Run [`systemctl --user daemon-reload`][systemd-docs::systemctl::daemon-reload], which will trigger the Quadlet service generator. This command is required whenever you adjust config in `dms.container`.
    3. You should now be able to start the service with `systemctl --user start dms`.

> ```ini title="dms.container"
> [Unit]
> Description="Docker Mail Server"
> Documentation=https://docker-mailserver.github.io/docker-mailserver/latest
> 
> [Service]
> Restart=always
> # Optional - This will run before the container starts:
> # - It ensures all the DMS volumes have the host directories created for you.
> # - For `mkdir` command to leverage the shell brace expansion syntax, you need to run it via bash.
> ExecStartPre=/usr/bin/bash -c 'mkdir -p %h/volumes/%N/{mail-data,mail-state,mail-logs,config}'
> 
> # This section enables the service at generation, avoids requiring `systemctl --user enable dms`:
> # - `multi-user.target` => root
> # - `default.target` => rootless
> [Install]
> WantedBy=default.target
> 
> [Container]
> ContainerName=%N
> HostName=mail.example.com
> Image=docker.io/mailserver/docker-mailserver:latest
> 
> PublishPort=25:25
> PublishPort=143:143
> PublishPort=587:587
> PublishPort=993:993
> 
> # The container UID for root will be mapped to the host UID running this Quadlet service.
> # All other UIDs in the container are mapped via the sub-id range for that user from host configs `/etc/subuid` + `/etc/subgid`.
> UIDMap=+0:@%U
> 
> # Volumes (Base location example: `%h/volumes/%N` => `~/volumes/dms`)
> # NOTE: If your host has SELinux enabled, avoid permission errors by appending the mount option `:Z`.
> Volume=%h/volumes/%N/mail-data:/var/mail
> Volume=%h/volumes/%N/mail-state:/var/mail-state
> Volume=%h/volumes/%N/mail-logs:/var/log/mail
> Volume=%h/volumes/%N/config:/tmp/docker-mailserver
> # Optional - Additional mounts:
> # NOTE: For SELinux, when using the `z` or `Z` mount options:
> #   Take caution if choosing a host location not belonging to your user. Consider using `SecurityLabelDisable=true` instead.
> #   https://docs.podman.io/en/latest/markdown/podman-run.1.html#volume-v-source-volume-host-dir-container-dir-options
> Volume=%h/volumes/certbot/certs:/etc/letsencrypt:ro
> 
> # Podman can create a timer (defaults to daily at midnight) to check the `registry` or `local` storage for detecting if the
> # image tag points to a new digest, if so it updates the image and restarts the service (similar to `containrrr/watchtower`):
> # https://docs.podman.io/en/latest/markdown/podman-auto-update.1.html
> AutoUpdate=registry
> 
> # Podman Quadlet has a better alternative instead of a volume directly bind mounting `/etc/localtime` to match the host TZ:
> # https://docs.podman.io/en/latest/markdown/podman-run.1.html#tz-timezone
> # NOTE: Should the host modify the system TZ, neither approach will sync the change to the `/etc/localtime` inside the running container.
> Timezone=local
> 
> Environment=SSL_TYPE=letsencrypt
> # NOTE: You may need to adjust the default `NETWORK_INTERFACE`:
> # https://docker-mailserver.github.io/docker-mailserver/latest/config/environment/#network_interface
> #Environment=NETWORK_INTERFACE=enp1s0
> #Environment=NETWORK_INTERFACE=tap0
> ```

Reviewer: Just indentation change here. Committing separately.

```suggestion
???+ example

    1. Create your DMS Quadlet at `~/.config/containers/systemd/dms.container` with the example content shown below.
        - Adjust settings like `HostName` as needed. You may prefer a different convention for your `Volume` host paths.
        - Some syntax like systemd specifiers and Podman's `UIDMap` value are explained in detail after this example.
    2. Run [`systemctl --user daemon-reload`][systemd-docs::systemctl::daemon-reload], which will trigger the Quadlet service generator. This command is required whenever you adjust config in `dms.container`.
    3. You should now be able to start the service with `systemctl --user start dms`.

    ```ini title="dms.container"
    [Unit]
    Description="Docker Mail Server"
    Documentation=https://docker-mailserver.github.io/docker-mailserver/latest

    [Service]
    Restart=always
    # Optional - This will run before the container starts:
    # - It ensures all the DMS volumes have the host directories created for you.
    # - For `mkdir` command to leverage the shell brace expansion syntax, you need to run it via bash.
    ExecStartPre=/usr/bin/bash -c 'mkdir -p %h/volumes/%N/{mail-data,mail-state,mail-logs,config}'

    # This section enables the service at generation, avoids requiring `systemctl --user enable dms`:
    # - `multi-user.target` => root
    # - `default.target` => rootless
    [Install]
    WantedBy=default.target

    [Container]
    ContainerName=%N
    HostName=mail.example.com
    Image=docker.io/mailserver/docker-mailserver:latest

    PublishPort=25:25
    PublishPort=143:143
    PublishPort=587:587
    PublishPort=993:993

    # The container UID for root will be mapped to the host UID running this Quadlet service.
    # All other UIDs in the container are mapped via the sub-id range for that user from host configs `/etc/subuid` + `/etc/subgid`.
    UIDMap=+0:@%U

    # Volumes (Base location example: `%h/volumes/%N` => `~/volumes/dms`)
    # NOTE: If your host has SELinux enabled, avoid permission errors by appending the mount option `:Z`.
    Volume=%h/volumes/%N/mail-data:/var/mail
    Volume=%h/volumes/%N/mail-state:/var/mail-state
    Volume=%h/volumes/%N/mail-logs:/var/log/mail
    Volume=%h/volumes/%N/config:/tmp/docker-mailserver
    # Optional - Additional mounts:
    # NOTE: For SELinux, when using the `z` or `Z` mount options:
    #   Take caution if choosing a host location not belonging to your user. Consider using `SecurityLabelDisable=true` instead.
    #   https://docs.podman.io/en/latest/markdown/podman-run.1.html#volume-v-source-volume-host-dir-container-dir-options
    Volume=%h/volumes/certbot/certs:/etc/letsencrypt:ro

    # Podman can create a timer (defaults to daily at midnight) to check the `registry` or `local` storage for detecting if the
    # image tag points to a new digest, if so it updates the image and restarts the service (similar to `containrrr/watchtower`):
    # https://docs.podman.io/en/latest/markdown/podman-auto-update.1.html
    AutoUpdate=registry

    # Podman Quadlet has a better alternative instead of a volume directly bind mounting `/etc/localtime` to match the host TZ:
    # https://docs.podman.io/en/latest/markdown/podman-run.1.html#tz-timezone
    # NOTE: Should the host modify the system TZ, neither approach will sync the change to the `/etc/localtime` inside the running container.
    Timezone=local

    Environment=SSL_TYPE=letsencrypt
    # NOTE: You may need to adjust the default `NETWORK_INTERFACE`:
    # https://docker-mailserver.github.io/docker-mailserver/latest/config/environment/#network_interface
    #Environment=NETWORK_INTERFACE=enp1s0
    #Environment=NETWORK_INTERFACE=tap0
    ```
```

docker compose ps
```

### Dockermailserver as a rootless Quadlet

> Podman generate systemd is now deprecated and has been integrated into Quadlet. A quadlet is a ini-file with the same structure as a systemd unit file. Writing a Quadlet and placing it on your system will generate a systemd-service on your machine for containers, pods, volumes, networks, kubes, images and builds. Quadlets created as root will then auto-start.

Author: Great addition, thank you

To make a rootless Quadlet auto-start make sure your user is *lingering*.

```bash
loginctl enable-linger user
```

Forcing a daemon-reload when a Quadlet-file is present in any of the accepted directories for Quadlets, will automatically generate a systemd-service that will auto-start at boot.

```bash
systemctl --user daemon-reload
```

Quadlet files for non-root users can be placed in the following directories

- $XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/containers/systemd/
- $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/containers/systemd/ or ~/.config/containers/systemd/
- /etc/containers/systemd/users/$(UID)
- /etc/containers/systemd/users/

#### Example Quadlet file

We have to use the .container extension for the quadlet generator to pick up the service.

> Because dockermailserver uses multiple users inside the container, we will either have to use our own user as root, resulting in our e-mails being owned by a subuid. Alternatively, using UIDMap we can map our rootless user to UID 5000 in the container who owns our e-mails. Using UIDMap also maps root user 0 inside the container to an available sub-uid of our rootless user. Otherwise the container will not have permission to configure itself.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because docker-mailserver uses multiple users inside the container, we will either have to use our own user as root, resulting in our e-mails being owned by a subuid. Alternatively, using UIDMap we can map our rootless user to UID 5000 in the container who owns our e-mails. Using UIDMap also maps root user 0 inside the container to an available sub-uid of our rootless user. Otherwise the container will not have permission to configure itself.
```

The example uses `Network=pasta` to use the pasta network driver, which will replace `slirp4netns`.

`dockermailservice.container`

```
[Service]
Restart=always

[Install]
WantedBy=default.target

[Unit]
Wants=network-online.target 
After=network-online.target

[Container]
ContainerName=dms
Image=docker.io/mailserver/docker-mailserver:latest 
# DMS uses uid 5000 for mailstate, but creates other folders for different users, which will be mapped to different sub-uids
UIDMap=5000:0:1
UIDMap=0:1:5000
UIDMap=5001:5001:60536
Network=pasta
PublishPort=25:25
PublishPort=143:143
PublishPort=587:587
PublishPort=993:993

# Volumes
Volume=/tank/dms/certs:/tmp/ssl
Volume=/tank/dms/maildata:/var/mail
Volume=/tank/dms/mailstate:/var/mail-state
Volume=/tank/dms/maillogs:/var/log/mail
Volume=/tank/dms/config:/tmp/docker-mailserver/

# If you want to use podmans auto-update service:
AutoUpdate=registry 

# Environment variables
# General Settings

Environment=HOSTNAME=example
Environment=DOMAINNAME=example.com
Environment=CONTAINER_NAME=dockermailserver
...
```

> Stopping the service with systemd will result in the container being removed. Restarting will use the existing container. You do not need to enable services with Quadlet.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Stopping the service with systemd will result in the container being removed. Restarting will use the existing container, which is however not recommended. You do not need to enable services with Quadlet.
```

The `PERMIT_DOCKER` variable in the `mailserver.env` file allows to specify trusted networks that do not need to authenticate. If the variable is left empty, only requests from localhost and the container IP are allowed, but in the case of rootless podman any IP will be resolved as localhost. Setting `PERMIT_DOCKER=none` enforces authentication also from localhost, which prevents sending unauthenticated emails.

#### Use the pasta network driver

> As of podman 5.0 pasta is the default network driver of rootless containers. This will have the same functionality and caveats as the `slirp4netns` driver. You do not need to set and interface name.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As of podman 5.0 pasta is the default network driver of rootless containers. This will have the same functionality and caveats as the `slirp4netns` driver. You do not need to set an interface name.
```
